Thank you.
So let's get the clicker working.
It just worked when I was last up here.
Okay, let's talk about what we're
going to cover in this session.
First I'm going to talk a bit about
some performance analysis concepts.
As you're going through the
process of thinking about
making your application fast,
what are some of the things you want
to consider in the process of that?
Then we'll take a look at some
specific examples of uses of two
different classes of performance
applications on specific test cases.
So we've got some high-level tools,
Sampler, Malloc Debug, things like that.
And then the Chud tools that
have been talked about some
earlier in this conference,
we'll take a look at both
of those in this session and
where they're applicable.
And also a little bit about the
integration with Xcode with these.
Now one thing that this session is not
really going to cover in detail is,
oh, you should not use this
API and you should use that
API and use this one here.
There's a lot of other sessions
like the Carbon performance session,
which I think was
Friday morning if I recall,
where you can get some details on that.
And there's a lot of great performance
documentation that can cover a
lot of those details as well.
Now this is going to
focus on the tools here.
But first let's talk about motivation.
Why worry about performance?
You know, it's a selling point.
We see it across the board.
It's a selling point for
Apple with the hardware.
It's a selling point
with your application.
If you've got competitors that
do similar things to your product
and they're a lot faster than you,
you know, that's a big competitive
advantage for them and vice versa.
So, let's talk about motivation.
performance problems may go unnoticed.
I've seen a couple examples of this in
recent days where you look at the system
and it's just sitting there idle with
a window up and maybe an inspector up.
Then you look at the CPU usage and
notice that 95% of the CPU is being used.
But it's sitting there idle.
What is going on?
Sometimes you actually have to look
for these things and detect them or the
issues of scalability that you don't see
when you're working with your unit tests.
But when it gets out into the
field and people are really
throwing lots of data at it,
then problems occur.
Remember, unlike with Mac OS 9,
where you had control at certain points,
you are not the only app on the system.
There's potentially a lot
of other things going on,
system demons in the background, etc.
It's not nice to nice your
process up to try to fool the unit
scheduling and things like that.
You really want to make sure
that you play well with the
other applications on the system.
And finally, you want to start thinking
about performance from the
get-go with your application.
It can be really hard to finish up your
whole development cycle and then say,
it's too slow,
and then try to come back in and
graft performance on at the end.
You might want to wait
and do tuning later on.
Don't obfuscate your code from
the beginning with no purpose,
but think about performance
issues as you go along.
go along.
[Transcript missing]
Once you've defined your benchmarks,
then you want to add
some instrumentation in,
maybe specific API calls at the start
and the end so that every time around
it's real easy to collect the statistics
of how long did these operations take.
You want to be able to measure this
on a precise basis time after time.
And that's the key to,
throughout your development process,
tracking results as you go along.
People ask, how did Safari get so fast?
How did they do this?
They tracked performance
throughout their development.
It was a key issue from the beginning.
And they never allowed performance
regressions to get into their code.
I'm sorry, that makes it slower.
Each engineer was required to
run the performance analysis
test suite in Safari before
they could check their code in.
And if it made it slower,
they weren't allowed to check it in.
That's a great feature, but I'm sorry,
performance is the number one feature,
so it doesn't get in
unless you make it faster.
And finally,
once you've gone through all this effort,
then out pop the hot spots that then
you can go in and start to tune these
where it really makes a difference.
Because, you know,
you've probably all observed that
we can tend to be notoriously bad
at guessing in advance where our
performance problems are going to be.
Gee, it was fun to spend a week
optimizing that particular routine,
but it made no difference.
So when I say Safari, you know,
it was really a part of their process.
They actually embedded into their
application and into the development
versions internally instrumentation
in the form of a panel here that their
engineers and their QA staff and managers
could pop up and run tests at any
point through the development process.
It really made it an integral part
of what they were doing because
it was so important to them.
They could do things like
check for memory leaks and
sample directly from here.
So you might want to consider.
Adding that kind of thing
to your application.
So when we talk about benchmarking,
what kinds of things
might you want to look at?
There's a wide variety of
factors that play a major role
in performance on Mac OS X.
You've probably heard us talk time
and time again about memory use.
We have a limited amount
of RAM space on the system.
And once we eat through that,
then we're starting to
page out to the disk.
And that's a lot slower.
So if you're using a lot of
static memory or leaking memory,
that can be a big problem.
So measure that.
Maybe you're not actually using that
much more static memory over time,
but your dynamic memory,
how much you used during this
particular operation really spiked up.
And that can cause problems.
So that's an area for measurement.
CPU use, I mentioned launch time.
There's other things
that are fairly obvious.
Gee, this is one of the major
operations of my system.
How long does that take?
If it's a fast operation,
maybe you want to scale it up and run
it 10,000 times and measure how long
does it take to do 10,000 runs of this.
Again, idle time.
You're not the only app on the system.
If you're not doing anything in your app,
it shouldn't be taking any time.
And then the spinning watch cursor,
the spinning rainbow cursor.
That shouldn't ever
come up on our system.
Well, it does occasionally in my
apps and it might in yours,
but let's go fix that.
We'll show you some ways to tackle that.
Drawing.
It might not be obvious,
but sometimes you're drawing
too many times to the screen.
We've got some great tools
to take a look at that.
Now that we're doing live resizing of
windows or live resizing of split views,
are you getting smooth
resizing during that?
There's a variety of things
to consider for benchmarking.
So once you've identified
your benchmarks,
then you need some tools to
take a look at the issues.
So we've got a variety of tools on the
system for both monitoring what's going
on and then for getting in and saying,
okay, I see that I've got
problems with CPU usage.
Where is the time actually being spent?
And so we can look at memory use and
CPU behavior and resource usage like file
systems and system calls and drawing.
So what's the best way to do that?
So we'll cover a lot of
these tools as we go through.
One thing to bear in mind as we think
about performance is that there's
actually a lot of different levels of
performance in the system that can make a
huge impact on your overall application.
So let's think about layers
of design abstraction.
Your application architecture.
If you're a multi-threaded application,
do you get deadlocks
between your threads?
We have tools like Thread
Viewer to take a look at that.
Maybe you're multi-process and
you're getting network hangs.
If you've got complex
object-oriented architecture,
are you sending too many messages
between the various objects?
Or maybe one object is acting as
the bottleneck for everything,
a god object that everything
has to go through.
These are sort of architecture-level
issues that you might want to
consider from the beginning.
Then within a specific module,
a specific class,
you can think about things
like your data structures,
your algorithms.
Are you allocating too much
memory here in this process?
Or is the algorithm itself a
poor algorithm for scaling up?
What's the interaction with the OS?
Again,
the documentation covers a lot of things
like this call in Carbon to enumerate
the directory structure is slow.
You might want to consider
using this instead.
Then bottleneck routines.
Once you've isolated it down, okay,
we seem to be spending a
lot of time in this routine.
So on the right of this diagram here,
we we show that we've got a number
of high-level tools that you
can look at some of the higher
levels of the design abstraction.
Once you get down to things
like the interaction with the
OS and the bottleneck routines,
then the sampler profiling tool and
the shark tool from the chud package
that we'll talk about later start to
kind of overlap in their capabilities.
They both let you do profiling and look
at things in somewhat different ways.
So both can be helpful.
When you really get down to trying to
optimize the use of your processor,
your memory,
Shark is a great tool for that,
plus other chud tools.
And then Activity Monitor lets you
take a look through everything as well.
So we'll be taking a look at a
number of new features on the system.
On the user CD, there's a new Activity
Monitor application that replaces
CPU Monitor and Process Viewer
and things like this.
Really nice application
that the Core OS team did.
Spin Control,
a new application to see what's going
on when the watch cursor's spinning.
Take a look at integration
of the tools with Xcode.
There's a number of new features in
Sampler that we'll take a look at.
And then with chud,
where you can really get in and
see what's going on now with
the G5 in addition to the G4,
things like that.
So,
With that, let me go ahead and turn
it over to Robert Bowdidge,
Performance Engineer, for looking at some
of the specific tools.
Thank you, Dave.
Thanks, Robert.
OK.
What's the first thing we
need in order to actually
demonstrate the Performance Tools?
we need a victim,
and the victim we've chosen this
year is the Sketch application.
This is a small Cocoa application that's
available in the Developer Tools CD.
So, for those of you who've seen
us using Carbon Apps through
all the Xcode demos today,
this allows you to realize that the
tools actually do work on Cocoa as well.
Now,
if you actually go and look at Sketch,
you won't see any performance problems.
This is a program that's intended
to do simple line drawings.
You know, draw a few rectangles,
put some text in, maybe do an org chart.
But if you look at it,
you don't necessarily see any
serious performance problems.
The guys who wrote it did a pretty
good job of making it a typical
Cocoa app with no performance problems.
So,
we need to add some performance problems.
And, I'm
and actually the way that we did it
this time was rather than adding some,
salting some bugs in there,
we decided to try to increase the scope.
So rather than trying
to do small drawings,
we said, "Well,
let's imagine our boss comes
into our office and says,
'Hey, you know, that Sketch app,
that's really good.
I think we could do architectural
software with that.'"
And so suddenly,
instead of drawing tens of rectangles,
five rectangles,
we're drawing thousands of rectangles.
And the question is,
what's going to happen?
Are we going to find any
performance problems?
Are we going to find that our
memory uses a heck of a lot
more than we ever expected?
Are we going to find CPU problems
where we're running too much code?
And hopefully this is a situation
that many of you run into in your own
code as you look at applications and
find out that on certain data sets it
doesn't quite behave as you expected.
So let's take a look at that.
So I'd like to bring Kristy Warren up,
who is the performance
engineer for the text team,
to actually do a demonstration for us.
To actually start, actually let's go on
the slides for a sec.
Thank you.
So, one question is how you actually
find the performance problems.
As Dave gave us an idea of some of the
processes that you might go through,
whether that's looking for regressions
or following a certain pattern of
measuring certain things every time,
but sometimes you don't have that.
Sometimes you start with a new
application and you're not quite
sure where to start looking.
So, the way I like to start and the way
our Vice President likes to start is to
use either the command line tool top,
which hopefully you've
seen in previous years,
or thanks to Eric Paton and some
of the folks on the CoreOS team,
we now have a new tool
called Activity Monitor,
which gives us a way to look at this.
If we could switch to
the demo machine now.
Thank you.
Okay, so we have activity monitor
over here on the side.
And the way activity monitor's divided
up is the information at the bottom
of the screen represents the system
wide information about your computer.
So in this window we're
looking at system memory.
And one interesting piece of
number here is the page ins,
page outs down at the bottom,
which represents the amount of swapping
your virtual memory system is doing.
How many pages are being
written off to disk?
The other things, the wedge,
the numbers here,
represent how physical memory
is divided up on your system.
How much of it's used for user stuff?
How much of it's used for the kernel?
How much of the memory is wired
down because there are structures
the kernel doesn't dare page out
like the virtual memory system?
The other tabs, for example, CPU,
give you an idea about how much
work the CPU's doing in general,
kind of like the CPU monitor
application does.
And the other tabs for disk activity,
disk usage, and so on,
also give you summary data.
The information at the top gives you
details about specific processes.
And so we can see activity
monitor sketch and so on.
And we get information not
only about what's running,
but how much CPU usage they're doing.
And we can sort this list according
to what's the most CPU intensive or
we can look in terms of process name
or hierarchy in the process groups.
So Christie already has sketch running.
And we can double click on that entry
to get a little more detail on sketch.
And the important numbers here is the,
the percent CPU as usual and the
private memory size down on the bottom.
Now, private memory size is kind
of an interesting number.
It represents the amount of
resident private memory that's
being used by this application.
That is the memory that's resident
in physical memory and the memory
that's only needed by your app.
And so this ends up being a nice
number because it represents
sort of the footprint of your
application because that memory is,
first of all,
only based on what you're using.
And then you have the number of memory
that's being used by your application.
So it's the number of memory that's
being used by your application.
So you can see,
based on what your application is doing.
And secondly,
it's the memory you can control.
It's the memory being used for
the heap or it's the memory that
you're allocating via VM allocate.
And so it gives you a good idea of,
of what your fault is and how much you
can reduce as opposed to the others
which tend to have a lot of details of
amounts that you can't actually reduce.
So we can see here that just having
sketch up took up about 1.64 megabytes.
Not great, not bad.
That'll do.
So if Christie can now load one
of our architectural drawings.
We have a factory here.
Okay, we're going to build factories.
And when the architect goes
to the customer and says,
"Here's your factory," the customer says,
"Oh, I want six floors, not three." Okay,
we can do that.
We can select the entire building,
we can copy it, and we can paste it.
Now we have six floors.
Oh no, that's not enough.
Let's make it twice as wide.
So let's do it again.
We'll select all.
We'll copy.
And copy is taking a little while.
That's not good.
And we can paste.
and so we're drawing a couple thousand
rectangles here to draw that building but
we're already noticing a couple issues.
One was that copy was getting
a little slow and we're going
to find out it actually gets
a lot slower as we go along.
But the other thing is if we go
over and look at Activity Monitor we
find out that we're actually
using 7.6 megabytes of memory.
Okay, so 7.6 megabytes minus 1 megabyte,
or 1.5 megabytes.
We used about 6 megabytes of memory
to do those two copies and pastes.
Okay,
so we've got a performance problem here.
We have a problem in what we're
doing in terms of the copy,
so in terms of CPU,
and we have a memory problem.
Could we switch back to the slides,
please?
Oh, another interesting thing about
Activity Monitor is because it's
looking at the entire system,
that means that you can see what's
going on in other processes.
And one of the things to
remember is on Mac OS X,
your application's work on the
system is not just a matter of what
your application is responsible for.
There are other processes,
whether they're little
demons that are on the side,
or more importantly,
things like the Windows server,
where if you're doing a lot of drawing,
now your application may only
be taking up 60% of the CPU,
but the Windows server could be
taking up the other 40%. So when
you're looking at Activity Viewer,
you also need to look at the whole system
to understand what else your application
may be doing so that you can find other
ways that you might be able to optimize.
Okay, so let's attack the first problem.
What do we do if memory
use seems a little high?
Well, why do we care?
Why don't we just like use
as much memory as we can?
This will at least make the
people who sell SIMs happy.
Well, there's a couple reasons for that.
One of the--and generally,
using too much memory
is not a good thing.
One of the reasons is your application
is slow because suddenly all the
data that you want the CPU to be
processing as fast as possible,
especially on one of these
G5s that can really race,
is--can't fit in cache
or you'll chase it out.
And so suddenly,
you're having to rely on the speed of
the main memory instead of the cache.
And so you want to keep your
application as memory lean as
possible so that you can have as
much as possible in the cache.
If you're not using the memory, well,
then it's just sort of wasting space
because the--it's sitting in physical
memory and maybe you're not touching it.
And if I come along and I start
playing iTunes or I start
running iPhoto or I start using
Mail or I start doing Safari,
which every one of your customers is also
doing when they're running their app,
I'm
That means that when Safari needs
more memory to put in some big page,
some of your pages may have
to get forced out of physical
memory and written off to disk.
And so the computer's going to have
to do a lot more work just because
you want to keep that memory around.
So you want to keep your memory
footprint slow for that reason.
And if you've forgotten about the memory,
if you've allocated it and you've
forgotten to get rid of it,
it's even worse because you can't free
it at that point and it's just going
to get copied around on the disk.
And because of the virtual memory system,
you can actually run into some
rather interesting problems
where you might not have expected
things to go as badly as they did.
So here's an example.
Let's imagine we've got
some really large file.
You know,
it's 10 megabytes or 100 megabytes.
And reading it in when we
need it seems a little slow.
Well, I know what I'll do.
I'll just read it in before
I need it so that it's available.
I'll read it into memory and
that way when I need that file,
it's right there.
The problem with that is that
what happens if I go off and
I run iPhoto and I run iTunes and
I run Mail and everything else?
Those start to need memory.
And so some of your pages that you've
brought in get chased out to disk.
And then when you actually
need that file or that parsed
representation of the file,
say, suddenly it has to be
brought in off of disk again.
And so in order to save
that disk read that you did,
you've now read it in memory,
written it out to memory,
and read it back in.
"So you don't want to do that.
You want to try to keep your memory
footprint as low as possible.
And you want to do that in terms
of both the memory you use and
the memory that you've forgotten
about and that you're leaking.
Now there's two tools that
you can use to do this.
One is called Object-to-Alec and
it looks at your memory use in
terms of how many objects you have.
And the second one is called Malic
Debug and it refers to things,
it refers to allocations in terms of
where they are so that you can see
particular places in your code that
tend to allocate a lot of memory.
And let's take a look
at the first of those,
Object-to-Alec.
And actually let's switch
to the demo screen.
Okay, so here I am.
I'm running Sketch in Xcode
because Xcode's really cool.
And I want to go and do
some performance analysis.
Okay, how do you do that?
Well, the first step I usually do,
or at least the first step I always
hear from everybody is go hunting
around on disk trying to figure out
where the performance tools are.
Actually, who knows where the
performance tools are?
Okay.
The developer tools are
in developer applications.
That's nice.
The performance tools are there too.
But the problem is,
you've got to go hunting around for them.
You've got to use the finder which was
computer-centric and not human-centric.
And that kind of,
and that wasn't very good.
I was going to use another
word but I won't say that.
And so, what, and we've improved that.
So now what you can do is,
you're going along and you say,
"I want to look at performance."
And you can go up to the debug menu
now and there's now an entry called
Launch using Performance Tool.
And it will list the three perform--.
Ooh.
It'll list the performance
tools that are--.
Geez, if I'd known this would,
if we'd known this
would make people happy.
And in fact, if you actually had
installed the Chud tools,
which sadly I did not because
I wasn't a good person,
you'd actually have Shark there too.
And I'd suggest you install Shark so that
you can actually see it on that list.
And so we can launch ObjectAlloc here.
And here's the Object Alloc window.
And let us launch SketchInit.
And what ObjectAlloc does
is it instrument your code,
it runs it, you answer a few questions,
but it keeps track of how many
objects have been created and
it updates that constantly.
And it shows not only the current number
of objects of that type that exist,
but the peak number that
have ever existed during the
lifetime of your program,
the total number you've allocated
during the entire program.
And so we can go to our little example.
We can open our factory.
And we can see that we're creating huge
numbers of CFStrings and all sorts of
other things as part of doing this work.
And here's our factory.
So let's again do our select all.
and Copy and our Paste.
And Object Alloc is doing its good work.
and you can see that things are updating.
And let's do that again if we could.
Now, you can notice that to the far side
of the numbers there's some histogram.
There's some bars there indicating
how many objects you have graphically.
And that's very nice because that
gives you a way to directly perceive
how fast things are changing.
So you can see, oh, my God.
I'm creating a lot of these
objects really quickly.
And the colors actually have meaning
because if it's colored yellow,
then that implies that the current number
of objects of that type is only about
20 percent of what the peak is or less,
which implies that you created a whole
bunch of them and then you backed off,
which may imply that maybe you're not
auto-releasing things quickly enough or
maybe you're just creating a huge number.
But it's hopefully going to
make you look at that to try to
figure out why you had so many.
And the red indicates that you
have only 10 percent of peak value.
Okay, so we've now done our
copy and we can go over.
And now what we do is what we should
do in all the performance tools.
What we're doing is
we're looking at these,
basically scrubbing our
nose against the data,
looking for something that
looks suspicious because the
performance tool can't really say,
"Oh, this is the problem.
If you fix this piece of code,
you'll be happy." In general,
it tends to be much more of a,
you look at it and you say, "Oh, gee,
I didn't expect that.
Why is that happening?" And then
you go and track down the bug.
And what we can see on this immediately
is that the second most common
object after general block 14,
that is mallocs of size 14,
because object alloc will look
at both mallocs and CF objects
and Objective-C objects,
is we can see that we have
4,000 NS invocation objects.
NS Invocation.
That's not in my code.
And in fact, you know,
not only do we have
4,000 of those things,
but if we check count as bytes,
we find out that out of 2.9 megabytes of
memory that are used for all the objects,
800K of it is used for NS Invocation.
So about 25% of my memory
is because of these.
That's odd.
Well, ObjectAlloc gives us a
way to track that down.
So what we can do is go over
to the Instance Browser.
and we can select NS Invocation
and we get a list of all
the objects of that type.
And if when we launch the
application we happen to see,
check the little box that said
keep track of retains and releases,
for that object we would see
all of the times that we did a
retain in Objective-C and did a
release on that object so that
we could find over-retains.
Or we could click on allocation event
as Christie's done here and we can take
a look at the back trace indicating
exactly where that object was allocated.
And we see here that it's allocated
in our select graphic object.
Now, this also shows another feature
that's new in the performance tools.
That in the past you'd find something
simple and you wouldn't be able
to track down where it came from.
Now,
we take a look at the STABs information,
the debugging information in your binary.
And if we can find the
location of that function,
we actually will highlight
it in the performance tools,
either with a little file
icon or by underlining it.
And so you can double click on that
and project build--and Xcode will
actually show the code for you.
And what we find out is that
the NS invocation objects
are being used for undo's.
So every time that we select a rectangle,
that we copy it, that we paste it,
for each of those thousands we end
up creating an NS invocation object
to handle undoing that at the end.
Okay, so we're creating
thousands of these things.
Okay, so this is an interesting problem.
We've got some solutions here.
We could just decide that the
undo support in Cocoa is just
such a big win productivity-wise
that we just don't care.
That's a fine answer.
If we really care because we're going
to be doing lots of architecture stuff,
then maybe we actually want
to change this and we want to
create our own undo mechanism.
Or a third option is we could say,
"Why are we allowing undo to
select because the HI guidelines
don't require us to?" And so you
could actually get rid of that.
So this is one of the ways that you
can step through finding something
suspicious and tracking down why that's
happening and tracking it down to your
code to understand what the problem is.
And that's how you can
use the performance tools.
So can we go back to the slides, please?
Okay, second question:
What do we do when the
CPU use seems too high?
First of all, why do we care again?
Well, answer: If you're doing something
and it's taking too long,
it's not only making your
application look bad,
but you're going to make my iTunes skip.
And I don't like that.
So you need to worry both about your
own application and how it performs
and how you're affecting the rest of
the system because you're not alone.
There's lots of other things
running on all our computers.
So there's a few tools you
can do to track down CPU use.
One of those is Sampler, our profiler.
Sampler can also be used to look at
what's called dynamic memory footprint,
as Christy puts it,
which is a way of understanding
where your calls to malloc are and
using those as suggestions of where
you might be doing too much work.
And there's also a tool called
Spin Control that's new on the
release that gives you a way to
automatically sample when you look
at when the spinning cursor comes up.
And I'm going to show all three of these.
In ports debug, look at it on your own.
So with Sampler,
Sampler is a statistical profiler,
technically.
And what that means is
that every 10 milliseconds,
5 milliseconds, 20 milliseconds,
Sampler stops your program and says,
"Hey, what's going on?" And it goes
and it gets a backtrace from
every thread that's running.
and looks to see what work is going on.
So it gathers the backtrace.
And then it lets the application
run for a little while
longer and keeps doing that.
And at the end of the sampling,
it gathers all those backtraces together
and smashes them together into a tree
so that you understand the range of
ways that your application is behaving.
and then it presents in a graphical way.
Now, there's a couple of things you
need to remember about Sampler.
Because it's statistical,
because it's only stopping
the program at times,
it doesn't know what happened in between.
And so that means that it may
not catch all the functions,
though any function should appear in the
samples in proportion to the amount of
time that it's actually spending running.
Now, if sampling every 10 milliseconds
isn't good enough for you,
that you need finer resolution,
then you should try using
the Performance Tools chart,
which you'll see after this.
And if you need to know
about every single call,
then you might want to
consider actually using Gprof,
which is a standard Unix profiler,
which requires you to
actually recompile your code.
So, let's take a look at Sampler.
Could we switch to the
demo machine again?
Okay, so we have Sampler up.
Up in the upper left-hand
corner now on the new version,
this is a new UI for this release.
And up in the upper left-hand corner you
get the type of sampling you're doing.
You can sample either based on time
or you can get a back trace every
time Malik's called or you can
look for specific function calls.
We're just going to do time samples here.
And what we'll do is we'll
launch Sketch in this.
We're going to look at that copy
because copy seemed like it was going
a little slow and I don't like that.
So we open up the factory again.
Let's do what we did before.
First of all, we need to start sampling.
If you remember how Sampler used to be,
you actually had to switch over to the
Sampler window and press the button
and go back to your application.
That was annoying because you often
would get lots of garbage because
of having to raise the window,
data that you didn't care about.
Sampler now has a hotkey.
Christie can actually hit
Command-Option-Control-R to
start and stop sampling.
Thank you, thank you.
We appreciate it.
And she can do the copy and paste.
And again.
and Kristi Krohn.
And Kristi can stop.
Now we can go over to Sampler and we can
try to take a look at what's going on.
Now this is the way that you
used to look at Sampler as well,
with a browser.
And the browser has some good
points and some bad points.
However, there were a lot of people at
Apple who actually would write their
own tools to sort of parse this data.
Because they like to display
it in an outline view.
And so Kristi actually was
very nice enough to actually
put in an outline view,
so make sure to thank her.
And so you can actually
look at the outline,
an outline view and actually turn
down triangles to see your call tree.
So for example,
we can see here that in every one
of the samples we were in main,
main always called
NS application main and so on.
And we can sort of step down in there,
snooping around,
and we can find where we're
calling into the menu code,
which is right about here.
Now, actually one of the things that
you saw was that the counts were
originally in terms of the samples,
how many times the
program had been stopped.
And Christie actually just
switched this so it was actually
showing it in terms of time,
which tends to be a better
way to actually understand it,
even though remember that's statistical
and so you can't say that took,
you know, that took 0.01 seconds.
And what we find is in that time
that we were doing the sampling,
we spent about 2.44 seconds in copy.
Okay, that seems a little odd.
And we can actually turn down
the triangle and see where
the time was spent in copying.
It turns out that we called four
routines there that took all the time.
Gee, that's weird.
Well,
luckily we still have that way of linking
to the source code because I can't
understand it from this point of view.
And so, Christy can double click on
Copy there and we get our source code.
And we find out that what's happening
is that when we do that copy,
we create a PDF file, well, PDF clipping,
we create a TIFF clipping,
and we create the Sketch internal
version of clipping.
Okay?
This is because Cocoa has this
nice feature where you can say,
"Hey, I can give you a clipping
in any of these formats."
Okay, that's very good because then
the application that you're
pasting it into can say,
"I only work in PDF, I need a TIFF,
I need a whatever," and it works.
But when we're doing
thousands of objects,
doing all three tends
to be a little wasteful.
and so a better way of doing this
would be to use another feature of
App Kit which is to basically say,
"Here are the things I can produce,
but I'm not going to produce
until you ask for them."
And so we could change this
code so that we only said,
"These are the types of clippings we
create." And then only when somebody
did the paste would we actually
create the clipping for that.
And so that would get rid
of this performance problem.
We'd make copy a lot faster at the
expense of making paste a little slower.
Okay,
could we go back to the slides please?
Now, the performance tools, as I've said,
are very good for exploring your data.
They're good for looking around and
trying to figure out what's going on.
But that's not always
the best way to work.
Because when you found a
particular performance problem,
such as the Safari people found,
that they really cared about page times,
about the page load
times and nothing else,
having to run Sampler every
time to gather the amount
of time would be wasteful.
And so, if you know what you're
going to be measuring,
try instrumenting your code,
putting in print statements to
learn how much time was spent or
automatically logging that time.
And this is really good because it
means that you can automatically
gather statistics so that you
can check for regressions.
And it means that you're always watching
exactly what you want to be watching.
And there's many ways
that you can do this.
There's a number of APIs in
Mac OS X for looking at time.
Some of the ones that are
interesting are uptime,
which tends to have
nanosecond resolution.
Or you can use get time of day if
you prefer BSD or the NSDate class
if you're in Objective-C.
When I actually did this on copy,
actually it's very strange because
I didn't expect to find anything,
but I thought, let's do this.
I actually found that I actually
started graphing out the amount of
time spent for each of the clippings
and for this task at the beginning,
which was called ordering the list,
which was sorting the things that
you clipped from back to front.
Okay, so first one, you know,
the PDF was the longest, second one,
sketch was the longest,
and then suddenly when I got
to about 4,000 objects,
suddenly the sort would take forever.
And unless I actually measured
this and unless I tried it on
a bunch of different sizes,
I never would have seen this.
And so this is one of the
advantages of instrumenting,
is it makes it very easy for
you to check to see when things
go wrong and why they are.
And if you actually look at
the code what you find is that
Sketch had--Sketch was basically made
for dealing with tens of objects.
And the way that it would do the
ordered list is it would use the
NSArray sort method for those
of you who are Objective-C fans.
And so it would basically say, "Hey,
go sort this." And there--and you
had to provide a comparison routine
to be able to say this is how you
compare two of these rectangles.
And the way the rectangles would
be compared is it would say,
"Hey, what's the index of each of
these in the big array that lists
everything that's being drawn?" Okay,
is this the first one, the fifth one,
the tenth one?
That's pretty efficient.
Except that that code would take your
NSArray and it would make a copy over
here in a nice static array so that
it could do the search really easily.
So it would have to malloc huge
amounts of memory and then it
would have to do a linear search.
So that meant that the comparison
was an order n operation,
which meant that sort ended up
being like an order n squared
log n or something like that.
And so you end up with this funky
thing where sort looked really fine
until you got about 4,000 elements
and then suddenly it was huge.
So this is why you want to instrument.
Now, another thing that we've now looked
at a couple of ways that you can go
looking for things that are suspicious.
Now, one of the interest--one of the
interesting things about big objectives,
object-oriented systems is that
you tend to have a lot of layers
because you've got this thing called
instrument or information hiding,
which is great.
And so you don't really know how
people in the line that thinks below,
but you sort of hope they're
doing the right thing.
But the problem is that often
they make assumptions you don't.
You're using the API in
ways that they don't expect.
And so,
some call that you might be making into
some layer might go all the way down
to the bottom of the system and back
up and take huge amounts of effort.
Or you may have something that you think
is inexpensive like that sort that ends
up being a very expensive operation.
So, Christie actually came to Apple and
suggested that one of the ways that
we should be looking at systems
is to be looking for this kind of
repetition because object oriented
systems tend to suffer from this.
And one of the ways that you can do
this is you can look for mallocs because
mallocs tend to be time consuming
and memory intensive operations and
everybody uses them all over the place.
And so if we can poke around and
see where mallocs are being called,
we might be able to see where
we're doing repetitive work we
really don't intend to be doing.
So,
let's switch over to the demo machine.
Okay, so Christy will now switch to
watching memory allocations and to
using what's called the trace view,
which is a way to actually look at
these mallocs in a very interesting way.
And we can go back over to
Sketch and we're going to do a
very small example because when
you're doing sampling by time,
you want to have lots of stuff
so that you hopefully find all
the functions you're looking at.
Here we're looking at every single call,
so you want to make your
example relatively small.
And we're going to look at what
the mallocs are being--what mallocs
are being done when we do our copy.
And so,
Christie has the two rectangles there.
She'll hit the hot key
to start recording,
do the copy, stop recording,
and we find out to do that
we required 6,000 mallocs.
You know,
and this probably isn't that unusual,
but it's a big system and
there's a lot of things going on.
And in fact, if we poke around,
the idea is that this graph
actually shows you the height of
the call stack going to each malloc.
So how many functions you had to get
to before you got to malloc from main.
and if we zoom in on one of those,
we'll actually find that you start
seeing these repetitive patterns.
See how it's kind of like a EKG,
you know, so blip, blip, blip, blip,
blip, at very regular patterns,
which implies that there's actually
some very regular operation going
on there if we're seeing that
signature over and over again.
And in fact,
if we go look we find out that we're down
in some code that's parsing an XML file.
And it turns out that when we do
a clipping and it's a PDF file,
the PDF file has to get information
on the printer because the printer
is used for the size of the page.
and the printer ends up going through the
CUPS daemon and the CUPS daemon ends up
giving us back XML and we have to parse
the XML and so we do lots of mallocs.
We never would have known this and
it might not show up in Sampler,
but this is a way to understand
sort of what the costs are.
And some of these are cases
where you might be able to say,
"Oh gee,
I shouldn't do that." And a lot of those
are cases where Apple needs to say,
"Oh gee, we ought to fix that and we
can actually fix it for you so
you never run into it." Okay,
can we switch back to the slides please?
Okay, the final demo I'll do
today is Spin Control,
which is a new application.
So the problem here is that
in general when you have,
when your application takes
too long to do something,
when it keeps,
when messages coming from the
Windows Server don't get responded
to within about five seconds usually,
the Windows Server puts
up the spinning cursor.
So usually this implies that your
application is behaving badly.
It's not responding quickly
enough for the Windows Server.
And so these tend to be bugs.
You know, you're doing too much work.
The problem is you can't
sample them because,
first of all,
they're sort of difficult to
catch because they tend to
sort of appear and disappear.
And even if you could get to sampler,
usually your machine's doing other things
because there's a spinning cursor up.
And so there's not really a chance
to actually go and attach to it.
And so the idea is that
SpinControl automatically
samples your application for you.
So let's switch back to the demo machine.
So Christie's Launch Spin Control,
which is in Developer Applications,
and you have to go find that yourself,
sadly.
And it has--it basically keeps a list
of every time that it detects a spin.
And you can set it for only one
application or all applications.
And we can do that copy that we were
doing that was causing us all that grief.
So we can select all again.
We can copy.
And we can paste.
We can do that again.
And sometimes you actually need to click
on the window so that there's a window
event that you might need to notice.
That's usually when the
spinning cursor comes up.
And we can see here,
the spinning cursor just came up,
because we copied one of those
things that takes 800 seconds.
Hopefully not.
I think I need to get off the stage soon.
And it automatically sampled it.
And now we could copy that and
paste it into email to send to a
developer to say something's wrong.
Or we can double click on it and
we get a sampler like Vue where
we can actually look at the code.
And in fact, we can go and see that
we're calling--oh boy,
that's nice.
We're in copy,
which turns out to be in NSArray,
which ends up calling
CFArrayGetValuedIndex,
just like I was explaining.
So I wasn't lying.
So, Spin Control gives you a
way to see the invisible.
It lets you actually see the kinds of
things that you otherwise can't sample.
So, this is a cool tool.
Try running it on your system,
leaving it up, and seeing what you catch.
Could we go back to the slides, please?
And thank you very much, Christy.
There's a number of other tools
that you need to check out yourself.
We don't have time for everything, sadly.
Hopefully you've seen these in
previous years if you've been here.
If you haven't,
take a look at some of these tools.
Take a look at the performance
book to find out how to use them.
But they all will have--they're
all valuable and interesting ways.
They might be able to help you
on certain types of problems,
and you need to explore how to use
them and which sorts of problems
are best found using any of these.
And make sure to watch your applications.
And with that,
I'd like to bring up Nathan Slingerland
to talk about the Chud tools,
which is--allows you to look
at code one level deeper than
what we've been looking at now.
Good luck.
There we go.
Okay, so as Robert said,
I'm Nathan Slingerland and I'm going to
talk to you today about the CHUD tools,
or Computer Hardware
Understanding Developer Tools.
And these are tools written by the
Apple Architecture and Performance Group.
They're a suite of tools that
give you low-level access
to the performance monitors.
So these are counters that are built
in to our hardware in the processors,
memory controller,
operating system like that.
And using these counters,
you can find problems in your
code and improve your code.
And of course,
CHUD tools are freely available
with the Developer Tools CD.
You can bring up Shark and
Xcode as you saw.
And they're freely
available on the web too,
so you can check there for updates.
If you were here last year,
we introduced CHUD.
We're happy to have 3.0 this year
with a lot of great improvements.
Shark is an instruction-level profiler,
so if you've ever used Shikari
from the older CHUD tools,
Shark is the successor to Shikari.
Monster is a spreadsheet
for performance events,
so you can look at these counter results
in either a spreadsheet or a chart form.
And Saturn is a new tool for
visualizing function call behavior.
And of course we have a set of other
lower level tools that you can use for
tuning things like AlteVec code or very
CPU intensive code that you want to
simulate using SIMG4 or soon SIMG5 that
will let you see exactly what's happening
at the lowest levels on the processor.
And of course we provide the Chud
Framework API so you can write your
own tools or control the Chud tools.
So the performance counters, as I said,
are in our processor and memory
controller and operating system.
And what they do is they count
interesting low-level performance events,
so things like cache
misses on the processor,
execution stall cycles,
page faults in the operating system.
And Chud lets you control
these and view the result.
So the first tool that we're
going to talk about that
uses these counters is Shark.
Shark is a system-wide profiling tool and
using Shark you can profile a process,
a particular thread or the entire system.
And in the most general usage of
Shark you can create a time profile.
So this lets you visualize performance
hotspots either in your code or not.
You can see if your hotspot,
your bottleneck,
is actually in your code using this.
You can also use it to find
event profiles so you can
relate performance events,
things like cache misses to
your code to find out where
cache misses are coming from.
It captures everything, drivers,
kernel applications.
What this means is if you're a driver
writer or a kernel extension writer,
you can use Shark to see the call
stacks and find out where the time
is being spent in your driver.
And we're very low overhead because
we're handling everything in the kernel.
In addition, once you have your
sampling session taken,
you can use Shark to find out where
the time is being spent in your driver.
And we're very low overhead because
we're handling everything in the kernel.
In addition, once you have your
sampling session taken,
you can use Shark to find out where
the time is being spent in your driver.
And we're very low overhead because
we're handling everything in the kernel.
We provide automated analysis.
We attempt to annotate your source
code and the disassembly of that
source code to point out common
problems and other things that
you can do to optimize your code.
There's a static analysis
feature to find suboptimal code.
So if you were in the
earlier Chud session,
you know that there are some
instructions that are on the G5 that
you need to look for and watch out
for and this will help you find them.
And we also provide
optimization tips as it says.
So we have a scriptable
command line version.
You can tell that in and sample things.
And of course you can save and review
sessions and pass those around.
So without further ado,
the best way to see this,
how to use the Chud tools
and Shark is to have a demo.
So for that, we're going to use the
Noble Ape simulation.
This is an open source program
written by Tom Barbele.
And to help me demo,
I'm going to bring up Sanjay Patel,
also the architecture
and performance group.
Okay, so first thing we'll do
is we'll bring up Noble 8.
Okay, so here we are.
We're simulating thinking
apes on an island,
a tropical island.
And this map window is showing
us an overview of the island
and the little red dots,
each red dot is an ape.
And we can look at,
we can focus in on one ape at a time.
That's the ape with the red
square around him there.
And the brain window to the right
here shows what his brain is,
how the changes are occurring in his
brain when he's walking around the
island and thinking about things.
So, you know,
our every good performance tool is here.
The first thing we'll do is we'll
use Shark to see what's happening in
the system while we run Noble Ape.
So this is the main Shark window.
By default we go to the time profile.
There are other built-in profiles,
of course, too, that take advantage of
the performance counters.
But for now we'll just
use the time profile.
And we also have a global hotkey.
You can put Shark,
it doesn't have to be in the
foreground to use it either.
So let's sample five or so
seconds and see what's happening.
So here's the profile listing
the important functions from
most sampled to least sampled.
And in the lower left here we
have the process pop-up and this
lists all the things that we
sampled during this time period.
So at the top is Noble Ape
and we kind of expect that.
We know that our simulation is CPU bound,
but it's only 50% of the time.
And you kind of wonder, well, okay,
why is that?
Well, if we go to the thread pop-up,
we can see that, in fact,
this application is single-threaded.
And because it's single-threaded,
we're not using half of
our dual processor machine.
So our first step in optimization was,
hey, let's thread this thing.
We used the Carbon MP API and
threaded Noble Ape.
So let's see what the
performance improvement was like.
Remember we had 1200 thoughts
per second before and we're
getting almost double that,
so that's pretty good.
But let's profile again and see
what we can do with this code.
So now we can see that we're taking
up a much greater portion of the time
on the machine and that's reassuring.
We want to do that for our simulation.
And we can see that we've
spawned these threads now.
We've got the main thread at 8%
and then two other threads that are
processing the apes in parallel,
40% apiece.
So the next step we can do is we
can double click on any entry in
this profile view and it'll show
us our source code colored with
where the samples were taken.
So what this tells you is what lines of
source code the most time was spent on.
So if we look here,
the scroll bar also gives us a way
to jump quickly to the hotspot.
So the hotspot is literally
just this function,
just this piece of the function,
this for loop, inside of the Cycle Troop
Brain Scaler function.
So it turns out that this is about
94% of the time if we highlight this.
Right?
So if we look,
Shark gives us a hint on how to fix
our code or how to make it better.
We click on this little
exclamation point.
It says, OK,
this loop contains 8-bit integer.
It's taking a lot of time.
You're spending a lot
of time in this loop.
Maybe it would be worth the
effort to vectorize this loop.
So that was our next step.
We went and we vectorized.
So let's go back.
Remember 2400?
Let's turn on vector.
Alright, so 10,000.
That's nice.
But we're still not done yet.
Let's look again with Shark and
see what else we could do.
So we see the vector
function showing up there.
We'll double click.
And we're in the vector code.
That's good.
If you're a Shikari user,
you probably know that we
had this disassembly view
that was similar to this.
And you can still get this back.
This disassembly view is actually set
right now to show G5 dispatch groups.
And there's more detail on
that in the full Chud session.
We'll go back to the source code for now.
And if you look closely
at the scroll bar,
we can see that actually,
even though we're spending a lot of time
in the vector code that we optimized,
now we're spending a relatively
bigger portion of the time inside
of the scalar code that we didn't
optimize before in the first step,
that we didn't vectorize before.
So our next step is, hey,
maybe we should vectorize the rest of
this since all these loops are fairly
similar and that's what Shark says to do.
So let's go back to Noble Ape.
So about 10,000, 9,500,
turn on vector optimized,
and we're almost 15,000.
So this is around 14 or so
times the original performance.
And what we're able to do is
take advantage of this massive
bandwidth we have available on
the Power Mac G5 by using AltaVec.
OK, so could we have the slides again,
please?
Thank you, Sanjay.
Okay, we did that.
Oh, wait.
Yeah.
So, just to summarize,
we compared this against
the Power Mac G4.
So, this is the scalar code running
on the current Power Mac G4 top of
the line against the Power Mac G5.
And you can see that actually
they're not all that far apart.
In the scalar code,
we actually have a longer pipe on the G5,
a longer pipeline.
And so, we're not entirely scaling
with this higher frequency.
We're entirely bound
in this CPU for this.
So, when we added the threading,
we can see that we get a bigger
jump than what the G4 got,
right,
going from scalar to scalar threaded.
Then vector, an even bigger jump.
And vector optimized,
an even bigger difference, right?
And the reason is that
as we improve this code,
we're more and more
constrained by the memory band.
So, we have a lot more memory
bandwidth available on the system.
While on the G5,
we're simply not as constrained, right?
We have a lot more memory
bandwidth to play with here.
So, by vectorizing your code, you can,
you know,
if we had just thrown this on the G5,
we would see a very marginal improvement.
But by putting the effort into vectorize,
we're able to take advantage
of a lot more of the system,
a lot more of what it has to offer.
So in addition to Shark,
we have some other tools.
Monster allows you to directly configure
the performance monitor counters,
collect data based on these timed
intervals or event counts or hotkey,
and then look at this in
spreadsheet or chart form.
It also has the ability
to compute metrics,
so things like bandwidth
or cycles per instruction,
and actually that's how we got
our bandwidth numbers for this
when we were looking at it.
This is a command line version
of Monster and you can also save
and review sessions for that.
Saturn is the last tool
we're going to talk about.
Saturn is similar in some ways to Gprof.
It gives you an exact profile
and allows you to visualize the
call tree of an application.
It uses GCC to instrument each function
in your application at entry and exit,
cords the function call
history to a trace file,
and then for each function it
can give you the call counts.
It can also use the performance
monitors to tell you the counts for
each function as well as the execution
times using a low level timer.
So okay,
at this point I'd like to bring up
Dave Payne again for session wrap up.
[Transcript missing]